Add documentation about contributing (#240)
zopefoundation/RestrictedPython: docs/contributing/index.rst

Please read the section :ref:`understand` first.

For all commits, you must run the tests locally with ``tox`` before pushing to the central repository.

Preperations for a new Python version
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

RestrictedPython should be updated for each new version of Python.
To do so:

-   Read the changelog (`What's new in Python`_).
-   Copy and adjust the new AST Grammar (found under: `Python 3 AST`_) to ``/docs/contributing/ast/python<version>.ast``.
-   Add a new file ``changes_from<old_version>to<new_version>.rst`` in the directory ``/docs/contributing/``.
-   Add those files to the ``toctree`` directive in ``index.rst``.

For each new *AST Node*:

 -   Add a ``visit_<AST Node>`` to ``/src/RestrictedPython/transformer.py``.
 -   Add tests to ``/tests/``.

If the new AST Node should be disabled by default, add a ``visit_<AST Node>`` method such as the following:

.. code-block:: python

    def visit_<AST Node>(self, node):
        """`<AST Node>` expression currently not allowed."""

>         self.not_allowed(node)

Reviewer: This is the default behavior, it is not needed to add a method just do deny using an AST node.

Author: I am a fan of:

> Explicit is better than implicit.

We should have a visit_<AST Node> method for each new node and also tests for every new functionallity in Python, so that we actually see if those could be a problem or a no-brainer to allow.

Reviewer: I am a fan of `simple is better than complicated` and having explicit handlers makes it more complicated. `transformer.py` is already > 1200 lines of code. And we even had duplicate handlers in the past because of the sheer amount of methods in this file.

Let's keep it as simple as possible!

Reviewer 2: I have no idea about the details here. Overall question, whats better for readability and testing, which would be most important to me?

    As we try to be **as explicit as possible**, all language features should have a corresponding ``visit_<AST Node>``.
    That follows the Zen of Python:

    .. code-block:: pycon
        :emphasize-lines: 5

        >>> import this
        The Zen of Python, by Tim Peters

        Beautiful is better than ugly.
        Explicit is better than implicit.
        Simple is better than complex.
        Complex is better than complicated.
        Flat is better than nested.
        Sparse is better than dense.
        Readability counts.
        Special cases aren't special enough to break the rules.
        Although practicality beats purity.
        Errors should never pass silently.
        Unless explicitly silenced.
        In the face of ambiguity, refuse the temptation to guess.
        There should be one-- and preferably only one --obvious way to do it.
        Although that way may not be obvious at first unless you're Dutch.
        Now is better than never.
        Although never is often better than *right* now.
        If the implementation is hard to explain, it's a bad idea.
        If the implementation is easy to explain, it may be a good idea.

>         Namespaces are one honking great idea -- let's do more of those!

Reviewer: I strongly dislike this paragraph: We are having coded a policy denying everything which is not explicitly allowed. IMHO this is explicit enough. Requiring a handler function for each AST node type makes it more complex:
* There is the handler function, which does not add any value.
* It also requires a test providing a valid code example, to keep the coverage at 100 %.
* The test has to run only on new enough python version to prevent syntax errors.
* …

You are requesting a maintenance burden here which does not seem to be appropriate  in my eyes. It just makes the project more complicated not more secure.

I never saw the need to deny each and every AST node type we do not support: There are currently probably more than a dozen AST node types which are not allowed by default but have no handler function. – No, please do no go and try to find them as it is fine as it is.

          If the implementation is easy to explain, it may be a good idea.
          Namespaces are one honking great idea -- let's do more of those!

  * Add a corresponding changelog entry.
  * Additionally modify ``.meta.toml`` and run the ``meta/config`` script (for details see: https://github.com/mgedmin/check-python-versions) to update the following files:

    * ``/setup.py`` - Check that the new Python version classifier has been added ``"Programming Language :: Python :: <version>",``, and that the ``python_requires`` section has been updated correctly.
    * ``/tox.ini`` - Check that a ``testenv`` entry is added to the general ``envlist`` statement.
    * ``/.github/workflows/tests.yml`` - Check that a corresponding Python version entry has been added to the matrix definition.
    * ``/docs/conf.py`` - Add the Python version to the ``intersphinx_mapping`` list.

  * Run the tests, linting and docs generation via ``tox`` locally before push.

* Create a pull request.

Enable a Python Feature in RestrictedPython
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

To enable a certain functionality in RestrictedPython, do the following:

> #. `Create a new issue on GitHub <https://github.com/zopefoundation/RestrictedPython/issues/new/choose>`__, requesting the new feature, for discussion.

Reviewer 3: The issue chooser needs to have an option to request a new feature. It's not obvious what to do because the two big friendly green buttons to report a bug and a security issue dominate the UI. There is also a link to add a new default issue template for the Zope organization, which can be overridden in each repository as needed. We do this for the Plone foundation.

![issue-chooser](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/102112/196608985-5b225bca-d4c5-46e0-9c85-209daaa148b5.png)

Author: Yes, but that is not part of a pull request, we need a organisational work for that, @icemac can you add a new template, or should we add a feature request tempalte to all zopefoundation repos?

Reviewer 4: Feel free to suggest a generic template that can be used across the organization if at all possible. It becomes a maintenance nightmare if there is a custom template in some or all repositories.

Reviewer 3: Issue created: https://github.com/zopefoundation/RestrictedPython/issues/242

> #. Create a pull request on GitHub.

Reviewer 3: This line needs to be pushed to the second-last item in the list, just before requesting a review.

Then dedent all the following items to simplify nesting.

Author: I am not shure which line you think, but the Issue should go first, so that it could be discussed. Implemening goes second, so that we do not wast manpower on a feature which will not be accepted.

Reviewer 3: I was referring to the PR creation. It looks like you resolved it. Looks good.

  * In ``/src/RestrictedPython/transformer.py``, change the corresponding ``visit_<AST Node>`` method.
  * In ``/tests/``, add or change the corresponding tests for this functionality.
  * Add a changelog entry.

>   * Run the tests, linting and docs generation via ``tox`` locally before push.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* On your local environment, use ``tox`` to run tests and lint, and build the docs, before pushing your commit to the remote repository. 
```

Contributing
============

* `Contributing to RestrictedPython`_

  * `Legal requirements to contribute to RestrictedPython`_
  * `Preperations for Contributing`_
  * `Preperations for a new Python version`_
  * `Enable a Python Feature in RestrictedPython`_

* `Understanding How RestrictedPython works internally`_
* `Differences between different Python versions`_

> .. _Contributing to RestrictedPython::

Reviewer 3: Check the syntax for cross-referencing arbitrary locations: https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/roles.html#ref-role. I don't think whitespace is allowed in the reference name. If not, then the others should be updated as well.

```suggestion
.. _Contributing-to-RestrictedPython:
```

Contributing to RestrictedPython
--------------------------------

.. _Legal requirements to contribute to RestrictedPython::

Legal requirements to contribute to RestrictedPython
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> The projects under the zopefoundation GitHub organization, and therefore RestrictedPython, are open source.

Reviewer 3: This sentence is a somewhat awkward. This is more direct.

```suggestion
The projects under the zopefoundation GitHub organization are open source, including RestrictedPython.
```

Contributing
============

> .. toctree::

Reviewer 3: I don't see any toctree entries. This should be either removed or populated.

Contributing to RestrictedPython
--------------------------------

Legal requirements to contribute to RestrictedPython
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> The projects under the zopefoundation GitHub organization, and therefore RestrictedPython, are open source and welcome contributions in different forms:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The projects under the zopefoundation GitHub organization, and therefore RestrictedPython, are open source.
We welcome contributions in different forms:
```

* bug reports
* code improvements and bug fixes
* documentation improvements
* pull request reviews

> For any changes in the repository besides trivial typo fixes you are required to sign the contributor agreement.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For any changes in the repository besides trivial typo fixes, you are required to sign the contributor agreement.
```

See https://www.zope.dev/developer/becoming-a-committer.html for details.

Please visit our `Developer Guidelines`_ if you'd like to contribute code changes and our `guidelines for reporting bugs`_ if you want to file a bug report.

.. _`Developer Guidelines`: https://www.zope.dev/developer/guidelines.html
.. _`guidelines for reporting bugs`: https://www.zope.dev/developer/reporting-bugs.html

Preperations for Contributing
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> If you want to contribute to this package, please prapare an development entvironment, that includes ``git``, ``tox`` and a posibility to have several Python Versions avaliable, for example ``pyenv``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want to contribute to this package, please prepare a development environment that includes ``git``, ``tox``, and several Python versions available through a Python manager such as ``pyenv``.
```

> Please read the part of `ref`Understanding How RestrictedPython works internally` first.

Reviewer 3: Check that this reference actually exists. If not, then add a reStructuredText label just above the target section heading, such as:

```
.. my-label::

My Heading
----------
```

And refer to it:

```
:ref:`my-label`
```

It should then display as the heading just below the label.

```suggestion
Please read the part of :ref:`Understanding How RestrictedPython works internally` first.
```

> Preperations for a new Python Version

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Preperations for a new Python version
```

+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> RestrictedPython should be updated for each new Version of Python.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
RestrictedPython should be updated for each new version of Python.
```

> To do so, please read the Changelog (`What's new in Python`_) and copy and adjust the new AST Grammar (can be found under: `Python 3 AST`_) to ``/docs/contributing/ast/python<version>.ast`` and add a new ``changes_from<old_version>to<new_version>.rst to /docs/contributing`` and add those to ``index.rst``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To do so:

-   Read the Changelog (`What's new in Python`_).
-   Copy and adjust the new AST Grammar (found under: `Python 3 AST`_) to ``/docs/contributing/ast/python<version>.ast``.
-   Add a new file ``changes_from<old_version>to<new_version>.rst`` in the directory ``/docs/contributing/``.
-   Add those files to the ``toctree`` directive in ``index.rst``.
```

> For each new *AST Node* please add a ``visit_<AST Node>`` to ``/src/RestrictedPython/transformer.py`` and add tests to ``/tests/``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For each new *AST Node*:

 -   Add a ``visit_<AST Node>`` to ``/src/RestrictedPython/transformer.py``.
 -   Add tests to ``/tests/``.
```

.. _`Developer Guidelines`: https://www.zope.dev/developer/guidelines.html
.. _`guidelines for reporting bugs`: https://www.zope.dev/developer/reporting-bugs.html

Preperations for Contributing
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

If you want to contribute to this package, please prapare an development entvironment, that includes ``git``, ``tox`` and a posibility to have several Python Versions avaliable, for example ``pyenv``.
Please read the part of `ref`Understanding How RestrictedPython works internally` first.

Preperations for a new Python Version
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

RestrictedPython should be updated for each new Version of Python.
To do so, please read the Changelog (`What's new in Python`_) and copy and adjust the new AST Grammar (can be found under: `Python 3 AST`_) to ``/docs/contributing/ast/python<version>.ast`` and add a new ``changes_from<old_version>to<new_version>.rst to /docs/contributing`` and add those to ``index.rst``.

For each new *AST Node* please add a ``visit_<AST Node>`` to ``/src/RestrictedPython/transformer.py`` and add tests to ``/tests/``.

> If the new AST Node should be disabled by default, please add a ``visit_<AST Node>`` methode like:

Reviewer 3: Is "Node" a formal or proper noun? I think it should be lowercase throughout. I'll let you make the call on that one, as I am not familiar with RP.

```suggestion
If the new AST Node should be disabled by default, add a ``visit_<AST Node>`` method such as the following:
```

.. code-block:: python

    def visit_<AST Node>(self, node):
        """`<AST Node>` expression currently not allowed."""
        self.not_allowed(node)

> Please note, that for all AST Nodes that has no explicite ``visit_<AST Node>`` methode a default applies, that denies the usage of this expression / functionality.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Please note, that for all AST Nodes without an explicit ``visit_<AST Node>`` method, a default applies which denies the usage of this expression and functionality.
```

> If the new AST Node should be enabled by default, with out any modification, please add a ``visit_<AST Node>``methode like:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the new AST Node should be enabled by default without any modification, please add a ``visit_<AST Node>``method such as the following:
```

.. _`Developer Guidelines`: https://www.zope.dev/developer/guidelines.html
.. _`guidelines for reporting bugs`: https://www.zope.dev/developer/reporting-bugs.html

.. _Preperations for Contributing::

Preperations for Contributing
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

If you want to contribute to this package, please prepare a development environment that includes ``git``, ``tox``, and several Python versions available through a Python manager such as ``pyenv``.

> Please read the part of `Understanding How RestrictedPython works internally`_ first.

Reviewer 3: This will need to change to an explicit reference, instead of implicit, to align with the renamed referenced label.

```suggestion
Please read the section :ref:`Understanding-How-RestrictedPython-works-internally` first.
```

> For all commits, please run the tests locally (with ``tox``) before pushing the the central repository.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For all commits, you must run the tests locally with ``tox`` before pushing to the central repository.
```

Preperations for a new Python version
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

RestrictedPython should be updated for each new version of Python.
To do so:

> -   Read the Changelog (`What's new in Python`_).

Reviewer 3: To be consistent with other instance of "changelog" later.

```suggestion
-   Read the changelog (`What's new in Python`_).
```

-   Add a new file ``changes_from<old_version>to<new_version>.rst`` in the directory ``/docs/contributing/``.
-   Add those files to the ``toctree`` directive in ``index.rst``.

For each new *AST Node*:

 -   Add a ``visit_<AST Node>`` to ``/src/RestrictedPython/transformer.py``.
 -   Add tests to ``/tests/``.

If the new AST Node should be disabled by default, add a ``visit_<AST Node>`` method such as the following:

.. code-block:: python

    def visit_<AST Node>(self, node):
        """`<AST Node>` expression currently not allowed."""
        self.not_allowed(node)

Please note, that for all AST Nodes without an explicit ``visit_<AST Node>`` method, a default applies which denies the usage of this expression and functionality.

If the new AST Node should be enabled by default, without any modification, please add a ``visit_<AST Node>`` method such as the following:

.. code-block:: python

    def visit_<AST Node>(self, node):
        """Allow `<AST Node>` expressions."""
        return self.node_contents_visit(node)

Add a corresponding changelog entry.

Additionally modify ``.meta.toml`` and run the ``meta/config`` script to update the following files:

> * ``/setup.py`` <-- please check afterwards the *classifiers* list if it contains the new Python Version as a ``"Programming Language :: Python :: <Version>",`` element, and if ``python_requires`` is correctly updated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* ``/setup.py`` - Check that the new Python version classifier has been added ``"Programming Language :: Python :: <version>",``, and that the ``python_requires`` section has been updated correctly.
```

> * ``/tox.ini`` <-- please check that a testenv entry is added to the general ``envlist`` statement

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* ``/tox.ini`` - Check that a ``testenv`` entry is added to the general ``envlist`` statement.
```

> * ``/.github/workflows/tests.yml`` <-- check if a corresponding python version entry is added to the matrix definition.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* ``/.github/workflows/tests.yml`` - Check that a corresponding Python version entry has been added to the matrix definition.
```

> Run the test via ``tox``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Run the tests via ``tox``.
```

> Create a Pull Request.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Create a pull request.
```

.. _Enable a Python Feature in RestrictedPython::

Enable a Python Feature in RestrictedPython
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> To enable a certain functionality in RestrictedPython, please follow the folloing steps:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To enable a certain functionality in RestrictedPython, do the following:
```

> #. Add a feature request on GitHub

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#. Add a feature request on GitHub.
```

> #. Create a Pull-Request on Github

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#. Create a pull request on GitHub.
```

>   * In ``/src/RestrictedPython/transformer.py`` change the corresponding ``visit_<AST Node>`` method

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * In ``/src/RestrictedPython/transformer.py``, change the corresponding ``visit_<AST Node>`` method.
```

>   * In ``/tests/`` add / change the corresponding tests for this functionality

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * In ``/tests/``, add or change the corresponding tests for this functionality.
```

>   * Add a changelog entry

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * Add a changelog entry.
```

>   * request a review by a core maintainer, e.g.:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * Request a review by a core maintainer, e.g.:
```

RestrictedPython should be updated for each new version of Python.
To do so:

* Read the changelog (`What's new in Python`_).

> * Create a pull request containing:

Reviewer 3: The step to create a pull request should come last, and not have nested elements.

>   * Copy and adjust the new AST Grammar (found under: `Python 3 AST`_) to ``/docs/contributing/ast/python<version>.ast``.

Reviewer 3: Dedent this and the following elements.

  * Add a new file ``changes_from<old_version>to<new_version>.rst`` in the directory ``/docs/contributing/``.

>     Maybe add an additional description of changes in that file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    If the changes are significant, especially if related to security, then add a description of the changes in that file.
```

>     Especially on security relevent elements.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

  * Add those files to the ``toctree`` directive in ``index.rst``.
  * For each new **AST Node** or functionality:

    * Add tests to ``/tests/``.
    * Add a ``visit_<AST Node>`` to ``/src/RestrictedPython/transformer.py``.

      If the new AST Node should be enabled by default, without any modification, please add a ``visit_<AST Node>`` method such as the following:

      .. code-block:: python

          def visit_<AST Node>(self, node):
              """Allow `<AST Node>` expressions."""
              return self.node_contents_visit(node)

      If the new AST Node should be disabled by default, add a ``visit_<AST Node>`` method such as the following:

      .. code-block:: python

          def visit_<AST Node>(self, node):
              """`<AST Node>` expression currently not allowed."""
              self.not_allowed(node)

      Please note, that for all AST Nodes without an explicit ``visit_<AST Node>`` method, a default applies which denies the usage of this expression and functionality.

>       As we try to be **as explizit as possible**, all language features should have a corresponding ``visit_<AST Node>``.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
      As we try to be **as explicit as possible**, all language features should have a corresponding ``visit_<AST Node>``.
```

      That follows the Zen of Python:

>       .. code-block:: python

Reviewer 3: This is actually the Python console (`pycon` lexer), not Python code.

```suggestion
      .. code-block:: pycon
```

          :emphasize-lines: 5

          >>> import this
          The Zen of Python, by Tim Peters

          Beautiful is better than ugly.
          Explicit is better than implicit.
          Simple is better than complex.
          Complex is better than complicated.
          Flat is better than nested.
          Sparse is better than dense.
          Readability counts.
          Special cases aren't special enough to break the rules.
          Although practicality beats purity.
          Errors should never pass silently.
          Unless explicitly silenced.
          In the face of ambiguity, refuse the temptation to guess.
          There should be one-- and preferably only one --obvious way to do it.
          Although that way may not be obvious at first unless you're Dutch.
          Now is better than never.
          Although never is often better than *right* now.
          If the implementation is hard to explain, it's a bad idea.
          If the implementation is easy to explain, it may be a good idea.
          Namespaces are one honking great idea -- let's do more of those!

  * Add a corresponding changelog entry.

>   * Additionally modify ``.meta.toml`` and run the ``meta/config`` script to update the following files:

Reviewer 5: This might need some more explanation.

    * ``/setup.py`` - Check that the new Python version classifier has been added ``"Programming Language :: Python :: <version>",``, and that the ``python_requires`` section has been updated correctly.
    * ``/tox.ini`` - Check that a ``testenv`` entry is added to the general ``envlist`` statement.
    * ``/.github/workflows/tests.yml`` - Check that a corresponding Python version entry has been added to the matrix definition.

>     * ``/docs/conf.py`` - Add Python version to ``intersphinx_mapping`` list

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * ``/docs/conf.py`` - Add the Python version to the ``intersphinx_mapping`` list.
```

>   * Run the tests via ``tox`` locally before push.

Reviewer 3: Move the step to create a pull request here. I would like to see a preview of the final version, to make sure everything is nested appropriately. It's hard to tell when there are only two spaces of indentation, instead of 4 spaces, for example.

```rst
-   Item 1
-   Item 2

    -   Item 2.1
    -   Item 2.2

        -   Item 2.2.1
        -   Item 2.2.2

    -   Item 2.3

-   Item 3
```

This is also consistent with Python code blocks, so you never have to worry about how many spaces are needed. The extra lines may be required between different levels of nesting, else errors may be thrown. Yeah, rst can be finicky.

Enable a Python Feature in RestrictedPython
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

To enable a certain functionality in RestrictedPython, do the following:

> #. Add a feature request on GitHub to discuss.

Reviewer 3: It might not be obvious that one needs to create an issue to make a feature request. Also note that the link to create a new issue has only two options:

- Report a bug
- Report a security issue

...neither of which is a feature request. 😱 I'd suggest adding that as an option to the `.github` files, either for the [organization](https://github.com/zopefoundation/.github/blob/master/.github/ISSUE_TEMPLATE/) or the local repo. I am not sure where it is configured for this repo.

```suggestion
#. [Create a new issue on GitHub](https://github.com/zopefoundation/RestrictedPython/issues/new/choose), requesting the new feature, for discussion.
```

   changes_from38to39
   changes_from39to310
   changes_from310to311
   changes_from311to312

.. Links

.. _`What's new in Python`: https://docs.python.org/3/whatsnew/

> .. _`What's new in Python 3.12`: https://docs.python.org/3.11/whatsnew/3.12.html

Reviewer 5: This link should be fixed:
```suggestion
.. _`What's new in Python 3.12`: https://docs.python.org/3.12/whatsnew/3.12.html
```
